♪ [music] ♪
In this video, we're going to learn all
about sending email with Node.js,
as well as taking a Pug file, converting
it to an HTML-ready email,
as well as then taking your CSS and
inlining it. Because if you've ever done
HTML email before, you know that, first,
it's a nightmare. It's really,
really hard. And second, it needs to make
sure that your CSS has been inlined into
it in order to make sure that it works
across all the different email clients.
So whenever you're doing email sending in
a development environment,
I use something called Mailtrap. Now
there's a number of different services out
there. This is a free freemium one. It
works for 20 sends, and then you delete
the older ones and you get new ones. But
essentially what it does is,
rather than set it up with an SMTP server,
something like I personally use Postmark
app to send all of my real email. But when
I'm in development mode I'll use Mailtrap.
And what this does is that it fakes being
a mail server.
And then anytime you send mail to this
fake mail server, it will,
instead of actually sending it to your
users it will just put it into this
Mailtrap and you'll be able to quickly see
who the emails are being sent to,
what they look like, when they've been
sent. And you don't have to worry about
going to your own Gmail account, or
accidentally, which is a nightmare
situation, accidentally sending some email
out to some users which you had real data
but were in development mode.
So go on over to mailtrap.io, and sign up
for an account. And I know there's other
services that do this, so if you have a
personal preference of one that you
prefer, there's self-hosted versions as
well. Feel free to go and set that up
right now. Now once you are signed up,
you're going to have access to your SMTP
credentials. We are going to be making
what's called a transport with something
called nodemailer, and we need all of
these credentials. So you tell me,
where does sensitive information go? Well,
it goes into our variables.env file.
Open up our variables.env file. The PORT
and HOST are already setup for Mailtrap,
so if you're using Mailtrap you can keep
those the same. You see here,
2525, as well as mailtrap.io is the actual
host. Then the Username we can just take
right from here. And the Password we can
take right from here.
Good. So now whenever we try to send email
with these credentials,
it's not going to actually make it to
anyone's inbox. It's going to be trapped
with Mailtrap.
Good. Now in order to actually send email
we need to make a new,
what I like to call, handler. So open up
your handlers, and we're going to make one
called mail.js. There's a couple different
packages we need in order to send email.
The first one is one called nodemailer.
And nodemailer is really,
really great because what it will do is it
will interface with SMTP or any number of
different what are called transports. And
it will do the sending of the email for
you. So I'll say const nodemailer, and
require it.
We also need something called pug, juice,
htmlToText, and our promisify library.
So I'm just going to type those in super
speed here, and make sure you grab them as
well.
Good. So I'll explain what all of these
are in just a second, but right now what
we need to know is that we have our
nodemailer being set up. And we have to
create what's called a transport. And a
transport is a way that you interface with
different ways of sending email, SMTP
being the most common. So we'll say const
transport = nodemailer.createTransport.
That takes an object where you have a
host.
And now the host is going to be taken from
here, right? Just as we did everything
else as a process.env. MAIL_HOST. We have
a port, which is going to be the exact
same but _port. Then we have an auth
object. Inside of that, you have a user,
which is going to be MAIL_...well, that
should be "PORT." MAIL_USER.
And then we have a pass, which is going to
be MAIL_PASS. Good.
So what we just did there is we created a
transport. And we can try to send a piece
of email immediately. So if you ever just
want to make sure that something works,
you can actually just code right in here.
And whenever the server starts up it will
send that email.
So we can take our transport and
call.sendMail, and sendMail is going to
take some options here which will have a
from Wes Bos, a to. I'll say
randy@example.com. A subject: 'Just trying
things out!'
The html is going to be
'Hey I, ' we'll put some HTML in here
strong love strong you. ' And then it also takes a text
for those weirdos that don't get HTML and
only text. Something like that, that was
just text people can read.
So good. We have our transport. We're
sending over the mail. Then if we import
this mail. js file into any one of our
files that's already running,
it should trigger this on page load and
send us an email. So I'm going to do that
in start. js. Let's just temporarily do it
at the bottom here.
TEMP send email. Again, make sure to take
this out later. And we'll just say
require('. /handlers/mail'). Good, so
don't save it just yet, but clear this
out. Give it a Save. And you'll see that
it ran. And all of a sudden,
this refreshed, and I say, "Hey, I love
you. Just trying things out.
From Wes Bos to Randy@example. com." You
can see the HTML source that we did,
but you can also see the Text version of
the email that we sent,
the Raw, the Analysis, the Checking HTML,
etc, etc. So some handy stuff that comes
along with this MailChimp. Mailtrap, not
MailChimp. That's a different thing.
Cool. So delete that. We don't need that.
We know that it's actually working.
And go back to your mail. js, and again,
get rid of the sendMail as well because
we're going to make a method that sort of
encapsulates that. But I just wanted to
make sure that our host, and port, and
user, and password were done properly.
Now whenever somebody resets their
password, we're going to call a function
called "send." So we'll say, exports. send
=, we'll make it async,
(options) takes in some options, and so
I'll make a sends in just a second.
And we'll open up our curly brackets
there. Good. Now what we want to do is
make our mailOption. So there's a const
mailOptions = from, and this is going to
be the from. So whatever application you
are doing, and say 'Wes Bos.
And you can put in the email address in
brackets here, so noreply@wesbos.com.
Whatever you want
the from address to be,
to, this is going to be
send to the options.user.email.
So we're going to pass in the
user who it needs to be sent to once we
find it. The HTML is going to be, say
'This will be filled in later.'
And our text properly is 'This will also
be filled in later.'
Yeah, so here's our options. Then we
want to go ahead and promisify our
sendmail function. Because by default,
again, sendmail will work as a callback.
We want to promisify it. So we'll say
const sendMail = promisify(transport.
sendMail. We'll bind it to the transport .
And transport is the Mailtrap one that we
set up. What's beautiful about that is
once you swap out your variables.
env for a production one, that'll all just
hook up when you fill it up with something
like Postmark app, which actually does
send your email. So const sendMail =
promisify. Good, we're going to return
sendMail, and we'll give it the
mailOptions that we have there. And the
mailOptions has the from,
the to, the html, text. Oh, and one last
thing. We also need the subject,
which is going to be the options. subject.
That's going to get passed in.
Good. Now we have this little function
that will send mail. And we're going to
hook it up to actually compile our Pug
files in just a second.
But right now we're just going to be
filling it in. And let's go to our
password-reset flow and actually get this
to send when we've sent it.
So that was in our auth controller. And
we'll take a look. Where was it where we
actually sent it? Here we go. In the
function called "forgot," we flashed,
"You have been emailed a password reset
link." Okay, good. But we don't want to
actually send them the URL. Remember, we
were doing that with that variable reset
URL? Take that away. And one line above it
we're going to use our mail.
send. Okay, well, we need to import this
mail library real quick from here.
So go to the top, const mail = require. Up
a level, because we're in controllers.
Then into our handlers. Then into our
mail. js file. And then we'll go back down
to our exports. forgot, and we'll say
mail. send. And there's a couple options
that need to be passed. It's one big
object. The user is going to be the actual
user that we found when we did our
database query. So the user = the user.
Or just user. And then the subject is
going to be 'Password Reset.'
Then we also need to pass along the
reset URL. So resetURL is going to be
equal to resetURL. Or like we've been
doing all along, just resetURL.
Good. So we are going to await that mail
to send. And then once it's been sent,
we're going to flash a success message and
redirect to a login.
So let's see, let's try the reset flow
once more. We'll go back to our
application. I'm going to log out. I'm
going to click on Log In.
I forgot my password. Send the reset It
says, "You have been emailed a password
reset link." If we go back to our Mailtrap
inbox here, we see it.
And now see we have a new mail that's
arrived, Password Reset.
And we don't see anything other than that
it was sent to the correct address.
And the HTML and the text tell us what
will be filled in later.
Good. So we have our email sending at the
right point. But now the question is,
how do we get the HTML generating? Because
we looked at views>email>email-layout,
and password-reset. This was all done in
Pug. How do we convert it from Pug into
HTML? And then how do we take our HTML and
our CSS and inline it?
So that's what we're going to be doing
next. We'll go back into our mail.
js. And we're going to make a function
called generateHTML. So const generateHTML
= an arrow function. And that arrow
function's going to take in two things,
a filename and an options object, which
will default to just being a blank object.
Okay, but why is that not exports.
generateHTML? It's just const.
And the reason behind that is because it's
not needed anywhere outside of this mail.
js file. So we're just going to make it a
regular function here rather than have to
export it, because it's not needed
anywhere else. Now we make a variable
called html, and we use our Pug library
that we imported right here.
And we're going to use one of the methods
on Pug called renderFile.
And that will take the name of the actual
file that we're looking for,
which in our case is going to get passed
in as password-reset.
pug. Now there's a big of a problem here,
because whenever you have render file,
or whenever you pass a function reference
to something on your disk,
you don't actually know where you are in
the folder system, because of course right
now we're in a handlers folder. But this
renderFile folder, it's in a totally
different folder. And it gets a little bit
mixed up. So what we can use there is we
use backticks. We can use one of these
variables that is available to us in any
file, and it's called __dirname. And you
see how it turned blue there?
That means my editor knows that that's a
special variable, sort of like window or
console in the browser. We have this
variable that's always available to us in
every single file. And dirname is going to
be equal to the current directory that we
are running this file from, which in our
case is going to be like my hard drive,
blah, blah, blah /handlers. So dirname
will give us what we're looking for.
Then we will go up a level, so /.. /,
because we don't want to be in the
handlers folder. We want to be in the main
folder. And we go into views,
into email, and then into the filename.
pug on the end. And then as a second
argument we are going to pass the options
that got passed into the render file.
And the options is going to contain all
the information, like the reset variable
and the user's email address. Then what
that will do is... let's just console log.
Or let's return the html. And we can
console log the html as well,
just so we can see where we're at. And we
can go back into our mailOptions,
or right above it. And we can make an HTML
variable and use our new function called
generateHTML. What do you need to pass it?
Well, options. filename is going to be the
name of the file. And then it also, see,
there we go. It also expects us to pass
the options variable as well. So then we
can take that HTML variable and swap out
the "This will be filled in later with
HTML," or again, because they're the same
thing just html. And when we now run this,
it should go off to our Pug,
find this password-reset. pug, generate it
into HTML, return it,
which will allow us to then pass it along
to our mailOption. So let's try it,
wesbos@gmail. com. Give it a reset. Tells
us it worked properly.
Let's go back to our Mailtrap inbox. Don't
see anything. Give it a refresh.
There we go, it just showed up. Click it.
Hey, look what's going on here.
Password Reset, "Hello, you've requested a
password reset. Please click the following
button to continue to reset..." Blah,
blah, blah, blah, blah. And then see this?
Localhost:777 account/reset, and then my
token. That's because when we generated
the actual resetURL, we passed it via our
mail. send, which then accepted it via
mail. send and gave it to all of our Pug
template files. So following me here,
then if we look at our password-reset Pug,
we use that variable resetURL inside of
here, and that's how it got to my actual
users at the end of the day.
So good so far. A couple more things is my
text still says it will be filled in
later. And also I haven't inlined my CSS,
which is a bit of a problem.
It works fine here because I'm on the web,
but if I open the sucker up in Windows XP
95, it's not going to work really well
because that CSS should be inlined.
So we'll head back to our mail. js and
let's deal with the text one first,
because that's pretty simple. We imported
a library here called htmlToText.
And what that will do is you just give it
HTML and it's going to,
guess what? going to give you text. And
what that will do is it will make all of
your text-based readers who
answer the email in dim
or whatever they're doing. It will give
them a nice, clean HTML-free email and
still allow them to read it. So we'll go
here and we'll simply just say const text
= htmlToText. fromString, and you pass all
of our HTML. And that's just going to make
a nice... format it with spaces and
asterisks around the bold stuff.
Let's swap that out here. Or again, just
text. Good. And let's check if the text is
now working. So I'm going to say
wesbos@gmail. com. Worked fine.
Open up my Password Reset, it looks good.
If I click on Text, you'll see here we go.
PASSWORD RESET is all in caps, and it will
then show the person the actual URL that
they can visit, rather than giving them
any sort of link. So good,
good, good. Last thing is, how do you
inline CSS? Well, there is a module called
juice. And what it does is you give it
HTML with style tags. And it will take
those style tags and it will inline them
in every single paragraph.
It will figure out what selectors match
what HTML, and inline all of our CSS for
us, which is exactly what you need when
you're running HTML. Because if we look in
our console here, you'll see that this is
our actual HTML here,
h2 Password Reset. And this CSS here is not
going to apply to any of this HTML in many
email clients. So we can go back to our
generateHTML. And what we can do is rather
than console log it, we can make a new
variable called inlined and just take
juice and pass it the HTML. And it's going
to do all of its work for us.
And then rather than returning HTML, we're
going to return inlined.
Good, that was easy. Just two little lines
of code. Now if I try to reset my password
and go back to my inbox here, it looks
exactly the same for me.
But if we click on the HTML source, you'll
see that... it's all in one line.
But you see how the body style tag is
inlined? Or the h2 tag has margin-bottom,
line-height, font-weight, font-family, it
has all of that stuff inlined.
That's exactly what Juice will do, is it
will take all the labor-intensive inlining
and just automatically do it for you
without having to use... I use to go to
just search for "CSS inliner tool." I
would find the MailChimp one and then I
would just paste it into here. And then it
would take my HTML and my CSS and convert
it for me. But this will automatically do
absolutely everything for me,
which I was really, really happy to do. So
that is sending email with Node.
js. It's really nice because you can
re-use this send function over and over
again, and really all you need to do is
just pass it a new filename as well as a
new subject, and a new user of
who to send that email to.
♪ [music] ♪